.TH writable\-paths 5 "2014-10-13" "Usert Commands"
.\"
.SH NAME
writable\-paths \- make select paths writable
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /etc/system-image/writable-paths
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
An Ubuntu Core system normally contains three partitions: dual read-only root
partitions and a writable data partition, used to record all
persistent system changes.

The file
.B writable\-paths
allows specific paths in the root partition filesystem to be made
writable, whilst leaving the rest of the root filesystem read-only. It
does this by creating overlaying writable mounts on top of the read-only
root filesystem. These writable mounts are backed to the writable
partition.

Any path not specified in this file, either directly or via a parent
directory is by definition read-only meaning all writes are disallowed.

Note further that this file effectively subsumes the
.BR fstab (5)
file since the
.B writable\-paths
file is read at early system startup and used to generate dynamically
the
.BR fstab (5)
file for the host.

The format of the file
is similar to the
.BR fstab (5)
file in that it contains a number of whitespace-separated fields which
specify how each path should be handled.

Comment lines are those starting with \(aq#\(aq.

Note that the order of entries in the file should not matter since it is
up to the init system to handle mount dependencies when parsing the
.BR fstab (5)
file.

.\"
.SH WARNINGS
Like the
.BR fstab (5)
file that it generates, modifications to the
.B writable\-paths
file should be done with extreme caution since invalid (or missing)
entries may lead to a broken system.

.B Do not
modify this file unless you understand how to work in the initramfs
should you introduce problems inadvertently.

It is also important to understand that you should not attempt to
modify the
.BR fstab (5) 
file since all changes will be discarded on next boot.

.\"
.SH FIELDS
.nr step 1 1
.\"
.IP \n[step] 3
.B Mount point
.IP
A pre-existing directory on the read-only root partition where the
writable mount will overlaid (in other words the
.I target
or
.I destination
of the mount).
.\"
.IP \n+[step] 3
.B Persistent storage path
.IP
An arbitrary name which will form the mount
.I source
directory. Note that this name does
.B not
need to relate to a pre-existing directory - it will be created as
required as a sub-directory of the writable partition.

The following names are reserved as they have special meaning:
.RS
.IP \fBnone\fR
Do not create a directory on the writable partition (used for temporary
mounts).
.IP \fBauto\fR
Choose a name automatically, based on the value of the mount point.
.RE
.\"
.IP \n+[step] 3
.B Type
.sp 1
The type of mount to create. The following are recognised:
.RS
.IP \fBpersistent\fR
Writes to the mount point will be persisted to the writable
partition.
.IP \fBsynced\fR
Any file appearing in the root filesystem will also be copied over to
writable storage. However file removals are still not synced and files
existing in both read-only and writeable storage will not be updated.
.IP \fBtemporary\fR
Writes to the mount point will only be maintained in-memory (using
.BR tmpfs (5) "" ") ,"
meaning all changes will be lost on reboot.
.RE
.\"
.IP \n+[step] 3
.B Action
.sp 1
Determines whether the mount requires a further operation before it
becomes usable. Recognised options:
.RS
.IP \fBtransition\fR
Allows moving a read-only rootfs directory to a writeable directory
stored on the writable partition. This is achieved by performing a
verbatim move (technically a copy followed by removal of the original
data) of any data from the mount point on the root filesystem to the
writable filesystem before mounting.
This
option requires the
.B type
field to be
.BR \%persistent "."

.I WARNING:
This is a
.B one-off operation
which requires that the source directory on
the writable partition
.B not
exist initially: if this condition is satisfied, the directory will then be
created and the data moved on first boot. Although the mountpoint will
be writable, note that subsequent boots will ignore any new files
appearing or disappearing in the original read-only rootfs location
unless you perform a factory reset.
.IP \fBnone\fR
No action is performed.
.RE
.\"
.IP \n+[step] 3
.B Mount Flags
.sp 1
Normally this is either
.B none
or
.B defaults
but can be any flags recognised by
.BR mount (8) "" "."
.\"
.SH EXAMPLES

.RS

.IP \(bu 4
Allow persistent writes to
.I /home
with all data being redirected to the directory
.I home_directories
below the writable partition mountpoint:
.RS
.sp 1
.nf
/home  home_directories  persistent  transition  none
.fi
.RE

.IP \(bu 4
Make
.I /var/lib/logrotate
writable and persistent by storing all writes in the writable
partition in an automatically-chosen directory name:
.RS
.sp 1
.nf
/var/lib/logrotate  auto  persistent  none  none
.fi
.RE

.IP \(bu 4
Use non-persistent storage for /tmp:
.RS
.sp 1
.nf
/tmp  none  temporary  none  defaults
.fi
.RE

.RE

.\"
.SH FILES
.IR /etc/system-image/writable-paths
.\"
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2014 Canonical Ltd.
.\"
.SH LICENSE
GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\"
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR fstab (5),
.BR initramfs-tools (8),
.BR mount (8),
.BR system\-image\-cli (1),
.BR tmpfs (5).
